---
layout: post
title: All about Two-regime Stochastic Car-Following Model (Newell-type CF)
date: 2023-02-07
tags: [Traffic-Flow, Car-following, ACC]

updated: 2023-02-07 # Updated date in YYYY-MM-DD format
author: 
  name:  # Author name, if not provided defaults to site.author.name
  homepage:  # Author link, if not provided defaults to site.author.homepage
pin: false # true if this post must be pinned on top of the page, default is false.
listed: true # false if this post must NOT be included on the posts page, sitemap, and any of the tag pages, default is true
index: true 
---

## Under Constructionnnnnnn

### Evolution of Newell-type Car-following Model
<br>

##### 1️⃣ Newell's Simplified Car-following model
> Newell, G. F. (2002). A simplified car-following theory: a lower order model. *Transportation Research Part B: Methodological*, 36(3), 195-205. [Download](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0191-2615(00)00044-8)

The Newell's simplified car-following model begins with a simple principle that a vehicle's time-space trajectory on a homogeneous highway is identical to its preceding vehicle's trajectory but with space and time shifts. The exact solution of this model is based on the LWR kinematic wave theory with triangular fundamental diagram which has three parameters: free-flow speed $$ u$$, wave speed $$-w$$, and jam density $$k_j$$. 

$$
x_{i}(t)=\min\{\underbrace{x_{i}(t-\tau)+ \color{orange}{u \tau}}_{\text{free-flow (Y)}},\ \underbrace{x_{i-1}(t-\tau)-\delta}_{\text{congestion (Z)}} \} 
$$


where $$ x_{i}(t)$$ is the postion of vehicle $$i$$ at time $$t$$,  $$ \tau = \frac{1}{wk_j} $$ is a time shift (wave trip time) between two consecutive trajectories, and $$ \delta = \frac{1}{k_j}$$ is a space shift (jam spacing). Here, $$u\tau$$ is a deterministic vehicle displacement between $$t-\tau $$ and $$t$$.

<br>

##### 2️⃣ Newell's model with stochastic desired acceleration - Brownian Motion
> Laval, J. A., Toth, C. S., & Zhou, Y. (2014). A parsimonious model for the formation of oscillations in car-following models. *Transportation Research Part B: Methodological*, 70, 228-238. [Download](
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trb.2014.09.004)

Newell's model has been extended by applying the bounded acceleration model to proudce **realistic oscillations** and **hysteresis**. Stochastic desired acceleration has taken into account to incorporate human error with the oscillation. The stochastic vehicle displacement, $$\xi_{i}(\tau)$$, replaces the deterministic term of Newell's original model. 

$$
x_{i}(t)=\min\{\underbrace{x_{i}(t-\tau)+ \color{orange}{\xi_{i}(\tau)}}_{\text{free-flow (Y)}},\ \underbrace{x_{i-1}(t-\tau)-\delta}_{\text{congestion (Z)}} \} 
$$

Desired acceleration is defined as the acceleration the driver imposes to the vehicle when traveling at a speed $$v(t)$$ at time $$t$$ under free-flow conditions. The mean desired acceleration is a linearly decreasing function of speed, $$a(v(t)) = (v_c - v(t)) \beta $$, where $$v_c$$ is a target speed and $$\beta$$ is an inverse relaxation time. The standard **Brownian motion** of $$W(t)$$ is used to formulate linear stochastic differential equation as below. 

$$
\begin{cases} d\xi(t)=v(t) dt, \quad \xi(0)=0 \\ dv(t)=(v_c-v(t))\beta dt + \color{orange}{\sigma dW(t)}, \quad v(0)=v_0 \end{cases}
$$

By solving this equation, one obtains:

$$ \begin{align} &E[\xi(t)] = v_c t - (1- e^{-\beta t})(v_c - v_0)/\beta \\ &V[\xi(t)] = \frac{\sigma^2}{2\beta^3} (e^{-\beta t} (4 - e^{-\beta t}) + 2 \beta t - 3) \end{align} $$



If more details are needed, one can refer to the paper. 


##### 3️⃣ Newell's model with stochastic desired acceleration - Geometric Brownian Motion
> Yuan, K., Laval, J., Knoop, V. L., Jiang, R., & Hoogendoorn, S. P. (2019). A geometric Brownian motion car-following model: towards a better understanding of capacity drop. *Transportmetrica B: Transport Dynamics*, 7(1), 915-927. [Download](https://doi.org/10.1080/21680566.2018.1518169)

As the standard brownian motion embedded desired acceleration model turned out to be unable to capture **capacity drop**, the **geometric brownian motion** is applied instead to address this. 

$$
\begin{cases} d\xi(t)=v(t) dt, \quad \xi(0)=0 \\ dv(t)=(v_c-v(t))\beta dt + \color{orange}{(v_c - v(t))\sigma dW(t)}, \quad v(0)=v_0 \end{cases}
$$


##### 4️⃣ Two-regime Stochastic Car-following model
> Xu, T., & Laval, J. A. (2019). Analysis of a two-regime stochastic car-following model: Explaining capacity drop and oscillation instabilities. *Transportation Research Record*, 2673(10), 610-619. [Download](https://doi.org/10.1177/0361198119850464)

> Xu, T., & Laval, J. (2020). Statistical inference for two-regime stochastic car-following models. *Transportation Research Part B: Methodological*, 134, 210-228. [Download](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trb.2020.02.003)

##### 5️⃣ Two-regime Stochastic Car-following model (Developed)
> Xu, T. (2020). *Parameter estimation and statistical inference of a two-regime car-following model* (Doctoral dissertation, Georgia Institute of Technology).

